Musicianship, broadly defined, is the extent to which an individual possesses traits associated with being musical. While that might seem like a loose and possibly tautological definition, the concept of musicianship or being a musician is hard to define. When used colloquially in modern, Western cultures the title of musician often refers to the extent to which an individual has the capacity to be technically and emotionally adept on an instrument in a performative context. A musician typically is someone who has at one point in their life spent time possibly practicing the tuba and performing with a symphony orchestra, or plays guitar in a garage band with monthly weekend shows at the local bar.
There is normally some sort of assumption that in order to get the title of musician that the individual’s livelihood is dependent on their ability to perform. Those that engage more with these types of activities are often pronounced as “more of a musician” than those who do not. But this definition is by no means a cultural universal and any ethnomusicologist would be quick to point out that this notion of performative musical culture is relatively new in Western culture (it was not until the late 19th Century did Western audiences adopt a culture reverence for performance) and that other cultures do not share the same concept of musician as profession that we as Westerners do. One of the standard talking points in most undergraduate introductions to ethnomusicology is some African cultures in their conception of music do not conceive of the sound component of music as different than the dance and the participatory element: everyone partaking in a musical event would then be deemed to be some level of musical and thus possesses some level of musicianship. If this definition is taken as the de facto definition of being a musician, it would be illogical to draw some sort of arbitrary line within these cultures and assert that some individuals are musicians and others are not based on the values imposed from our culture. Using this lens and logic and then redirecting it back on Western culture, the idea of who gets to count as a musician begins to fall apart.
Acknowledging that there are a multitude of aspects that could contribute to being called a musician, the question then becomes “Who gets to count as a musician?” For most intents and purposes, this is a poorly formed question. As argued above, granting the title of musician to one individual over should be fluid and nuanced to the context and culture of the situation and be handled with care. Though there is one area of music research that is dependent on the ability to measure musicianship is that of music psychology. From a quantitative and empirical standpoint, the extent to
which an individual possess traits associated with being musical, or musicianship, needs to be operationalized in order for questions about musicality to be moved from the sphere of relative, critical theory to a place where questions are now demarcated, and thus falsifiable in a Popperian sense. Only once this operationalization has been made can researchers begin to investigate claims of how the degree that an individual engages in music, or is a musician, is related to other human behaviors.
Attempting to measure musicianship is by no means a recent endeavor. Almost one century ago Carl Seashore first published his Tests of Musical Ability in 1919, thus marking the first attempt to use psychometric tools to asses musicianship. The test consisted of five different submodules measuring perceptual abilities ranging from psychoacoustics and memory for melody. Inherent in its design were many of the performative, Western assumptions mentioned before, namely that one’s listening and perceptual ability could be used as a proxy for that individual’s ability to be successful in a musical context. Following up on Seashore’s initial publication, the Scientific American even ran an article about the test in 1923 that touted Seashore’s claims and noted that his test was able to correctly identify a boy from Iowa who was destined to become a farm hand, but after taking Seashore’s test was identified as being gifted for musical ability and went on to be the “Des Moins Kreutzer”.
Since the early 20th century, many other researchers have attempted this task of measuring musicianship and brief histories of psychometrics can be found in the litany of tests that have arisen since Seashore’s. Since then there have been the Wing test, the Musical Ear Test, the Profile of Musical Skills or PROMS (Law and Zetner, 2012), the Ollen Musical Sophistication Index (Ollen, 2006), the Goldsmiths Musical Sophistication Index or Gold-MSI (Mullensiefen, Gingras, Musil, Stewart, 2014), as well as the MUSEBAQ (Chin et. al, 2018). Each of these tests has taken a different approach to attempting to measure musicianship. For example, the PROMS is a perceptual test music like the Musical Ear Test or Seashore’s that uses objective measures of ability based on memory tasks in order to give the individual taking the exam a numeric score reflecting the degree to which they are able to perceive musical stimuli. A similar approach but with self-report is taken with the Ollen Musical Sophistication Index which again gives some sort of quantitative output that is meant to be used a proxy for musicality, but lacks any sort of perceptual objective data. Following up on both of these tests the Gold-MSI uses both self-report and objective tests in order to give the individual a multitude of scores relating the multitude of aspects the tool purports to measure. With each of these tools, the output is a continuous variable implying that each trait measured is conceptualized at the level of measurement as being on a continuum rather than a dichotomous variable as is often reflected in the colloquial language used to talk about musicianship.
Despite this granularity of measurement, when used in other studies, researchers often revert back to the colloquial conception of the idea and split individuals into two groups based on some sort of arbitrary variable. The most recent and possibly clearest example of this is the recent meta-review looking at musicians and memory published by Talamini and colleagues in 2017 that used the amount of years that an individual engaged in University level music education at the undergraduate level as the cutoff to decide who qualified as a musician and who did not. Their claims were that musicians outperformed their non-musician counterparts on all measures of memory, implying musical training might have something to do with this, yet also giving two sentences in their discussion that this research might be conflating the direction of causality and may in fact actually be reflecting the fact that smarter people tend to do music, a finding with a fair amount of support from a recent line of papers from the lab of Glenn Schellenberg (most recently Swaminithan, 2017).
While all of these studies used in conjunction with one another seem to paint some sort of picture that musicianship is often associated with higher cognitive ability, the underlying assumption here is that the musicianship itself is driving the phenomena. This logic is flawed in that musicianship itself is both a mathematical and cultural construct that does not even make logical sense to use to describe what is causing a person to perform better at the tasks that these tests measure. This is an obvious case of where drawing the line on musicianship matters.
Borrowing logic from a recent article in the field of cognitive psychology, it would not make sense to say that “Sarah used her musicianship in order to complete the musical memory task” (Kovacs and Conway, 2016). Musicianship is not an internal resource that in this case Sarah would be drawing from, but rather a collection of separate, but related abilities used to complete a very specific task related to a very small subset of activities in the entire universe that would comprise all possible musical abilities. Continuing to borrow from Kovacs and Conway, to explain how individuals would be let’s say by comparing a memory task, it would be much more helpful to model this as a set of separate yet overlapping processes coming together, what they dub as Process Overlap Theory. They make their point using the example of g, a hypothetical construct that reflective of the positive manifold in intelligence research.
This idea of the positive manifold is key to understanding the argument. The positive manifold is the idea that if an individual is to do well on one mental test, for example a task that requires the ability to mentally rotate an object, then chances are that the same individual would also do well on a task of general fluid intelligence, general crystalized intelligence, as well as working memory capacity. If in an experiment a participant had taken all of these scores, they would then use the statistical technique of factor analysis in order to flush out any sort of noise and be left with the individual’s g score. Borrowing again the example initially used by Kovacs and Conway, they note that you would not say the sentence “John used his general intelligence to complete the mental rotation task” would not make sense, but rather “John recruited mental resources required to create an image in his head then rotate it”.
Even without a training in cognitive psychology this does not make sense to say. Additionally the authors argue that the idea of g is fallible in that studies examining double dissociations at the behavioral and neurological level do not support the idea of g as any sort of ontological, causal reality and note that researchers should not confuse the statistically constructed g as any sort of reality that explains human behavior in a satisfactory way. The form of their entire argument can almost be directly lifted with exchanging the idea of g with musicianship in order to make the same points about the flaws with attempting to measure musicianship.
Understanding these problems with measuring musicianship finally leads to my personal opinion about musicianship as compared to the mainstream music and psychology literature: namely that it does not exist. Musicianship as an ontological truth is not real and is a concept that arises as an attempt to mathematically formalize colloquial language used to describe the extent to which an individual possesses traits associated with being musical. Musicianship should rather be thought of a set of related, though not unified abilities relating to musical activity. This definition of music follows some of the initial theoretical claims that inspired tools like the Gold-MSI by researchers such as Dan Levitin who in 2012 argued for a more polymorphic view of musicianship that initially divorced perceptual and performative abilities. My view of musicianship steps beyond that and asserts that any of the latent traits associated with musicianship or musical sophistication should be viewed as mathematical constructs used to model language and that in order for music psychology to make more interpretable
progress as a research discipline modeling needs to be more reflective of the cognitive abilities used to complete each related, yet not unified tasks.
This view is quite different that most music or psychology literature in that psychometric tools like the Gold-MSI and MUSBAQ because it asserts that the composite numbers that are derived from these scores do not reflect any sort of ontological truth. This is not to say that these tools are not useful! While what I am advocating here in terms of understanding musicianship at the core suggest that it is not real, as Wiggins argues for in his overview to the 2009 special issue in Musicae Sciente on musical similarity, not every theory to explain something has to be valid on all levels. The fact that the Gold-MSI general score positively correlates with the mass of white matter in an individual’s corpus callosum is a helpful fact to have established. What I am arguing for is that the causal element driving this relationship if thought of as being musicianship driving this effect would be poorly understood.
Taking this line of thought to its logical conclusion, creating any sort of psychometric test that claims to be able to measure some sort of deeply held latent variable would be then misguided. To truly measure these elusive traits would require firming up exactly what the researcher thinks are the causal mechanisms that could be manipulated in order to produce the hypothesized end result.
While the prior assertions might sound a bit extreme, adopting this view of musicianship has a fair amount of positive returns. The first and most apparent would be that future studies in music psychology would be able to better model the causal mechanisms that lead to variation at the individual level. By not having to pass through a statistical artefact, musical sophistication, less noise would be introduced into models of cause and effect. Secondly, if this view of musicianship were adopted in educational contexts, situations where an individual was either self (or other) diagnosed as “not being musical enough” the root of the problem would not be understood as being a lack of musicality, but rather a lack some other ability be it cognitive or experiential. This notion of related, yet not unified musicality would then also be able to predict that very specific factors outside of anything traditionally thought of a relating to musicality could be used to better predict performance on a musical task.
Former research from Hansen and Pearce (2017) that showed that individuals with more jazz backgrounds would be better at predicting melodic expectations in their familiar jazz idiom than those with classical backgrounds would be better explained by listening exposure rather than just the jazz-musicality (though to my memory it was not measured in that way). Similar evidence was also presented by David Huron with folk melodies in his 2006 book Sweet Anticipation. Additionally some of my own work (Baker and Mullesiefen, 2017) when reinterpreted gives credence to this line of thought. This study claimed that a latent variable of “Wagnerism” was able to predict above and beyond and to a greater degree than musicianship (as measured by the Gold-MSI musical training subscale) at individual’s ability to perform a musical memory task. While running the risk of the finding qualifying as what Huron might dub “Grandma Research” (that is a research finding that when I told my Grandma of the finding she might respond with “I could have told you that!”), important to this is the implication that musical ability or musicianship should not then qualify as a prerequisite in order to “get” more esoteric art music. It is just a matter of putting in the time to be able to parse the auditory scene with the appropriate background information (in this case, have you heard the leitmotivs before?).
Thinking more critically about musicianship as a parallel for intelligence or g and the construction of such tools that use self-report like the Gold-MSI, would other phenomena in intelligence research manifest themselves since the mental models are the same? Take for example the Flynn effect, the idea
that with each generation individuals are growing increasingly more intelligence as a collective. As a thought experiment, would it have meant to go back and administer one of these psychometric tests a century ago when Charles Spearman were administering his first tests of intelligence? Given items from the Gold-MSI relating to musical engagement (especially those dealing with tracking music on the internet or listening actively to music via some sort of device) and clearly having to score lower on those items and thus lead to scoring lower as a whole on their musical sophistication score? Would this be equivalent to a musical Flynn effect? Or in the perceptual tests, if ability to remember melodies is largely dependent on the degree of exposure to patterns in a culture’s melody, via the mechanism of statistical learning, would the types of melodies and degree of music an individual was exposed to on a daily routine diminish an individual’s ability to score highly on the test? Clearly if the answer is yes to either these hypothetical claims of self-report or the objective test, I believe it only bolsters the argument that musicianship is better explained by other processes and that musicianship is indeed just a mathematical artefact used to mirror language used to discuss a collective behavior.
